SCCS "%Z%%M%	%I%	%E% meem"

This file is part of the rlpr package.  It discusses how to install
rlpr on your computer network(s).  Although installing the rlpr
package is not particularly complicated, it is not obvious either;
please take the time to read these instructions -- you will be glad
you did.

This file and INSTALL.generic make up the complete installation
instructions for the rlpr package.  INSTALL.generic contains the
standard GNU autoconf installation instructions; if you're already
familiar with GNU autoconf, you can safely ignore INSTALL.generic.

This file does not discuss what rlpr is and how to use it; for that
information, please see README or the appropriate manpages.


How do I install rlpr?
======================

How you install the rlpr package depends largely on whether you have
root access on the machine(s) you want to print from.  In any case,
the programs `rlpr', `rlpq', and `rlprm' will need to be installed on
each machine you wish to print from.  If you do not have root access
on the machine you want to print from, you will also need to install
`rlprd' on a networked machine that you do have root access on.

The reason root access matters is because traditionally `rlpr', `rlpq'
and `rlprm' need to be installed setuid root to contact the remote
`lpd' that you wish to print to.  When possible, installing `rlpr',
`rlpq' and `rlprm' setuid root is highly recommended, since it is a
simpler and more intuitive configuration.

If you do not have root access on the machine you wish to print from
or if installing setuid root programs makes you uncomfortable (and it
well might), you should follow the instructions for the case where one
does not have root access.  In this case, you will need to set up an
rlprd proxy somewhere on your network.

In either case, make sure you read `General Instructions' afterwards,
since it contains useful information pertinent in either installation
scenario.


Installation for those with root access
=======================================

In this case, the steps are:

	1. unpack the distribution on the machine you wish to print from
	2. `cd rlpr-2.06'
	3. `su' to root
	4. `./configure' (pass whatever options you need, like --prefix)
	5. `make install-setuid'
	6. read the `General Instructions' section below


Installation for those without root access
==========================================

In this case, the steps are:

	1. unpack the distribution on the machine you wish to print from
	2. `cd rlpr-2.06'
	3. `./configure' (pass whatever options you need, like --prefix)
	4. `make install'
	5. unpack the distribution on the machine you wish to run rlprd
	   on (you must have root access on that machine and it must
	   be network-accessible; probably the machine you want to
	   print to). 
	6. `cd rlpr-2.06'
	7. `./configure' (pass whatever options you need, like --prefix)
	8. `su' to root
	9. `make install-proxy'
	10. `rlprd'
	11. read the `General Instructions' section below


General Instructions
====================

The machine you wish to print to must be configured to permit requests
from the machine(s) you wish to print from.  Under Unix, this is done
by including the IP addresses of the hosts you wish to print from in
the /etc/hosts.lpd file on the machine you wish to print to.  Please
note that in the case of a proxy configuration, the machine your
printing "from" is the machine running the proxy, not the machine the
request originates from.

Note that the host-based lpd security is quite weak; there's
unfortunately little anyone can do about it.  In general, we can only
hope that malicious users will not send print jobs to other user's
printers -- there's nothing we can do to stop them.


Installing BSD symlinks
=======================

Since the `rlpr' `rlpq' and `rlprm' commands are complete replacements
for their BSD counterparts, the BSD commands by these names can be
actually replaced by symlinks to the rlpr versions.  When the rlpr
commands are invoked with their BSD names, they will act like their
BSD counterparts (the `--verbose' option can be used to restore their
traditional behavior).

To install the BSD symlinks, just type `make bsd-symlinks' after
installing the rlpr package (note that you must of course be root).
