.\" SCCS "@(#)rlpq.1	1.3	01/01/02 meem"
.TH rlpq 1 "1999/10/28" "rlpr 2.04" "UNIX Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
rlpq \- remote line printer queue examination program
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrlpq\fP [-lmqNV] [\fB-H\fPprinthost] [\fB-P\fPprinter] [\fB-X\fPproxyhost]
[\fB--debug\fP] [\fB--timeout=\fPseconds] [\fB--port=\fPport] [ \fBjob # ... \fP] [ \fBusername ... \fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBrlpq\fP uses TCP/IP to examine print queues for printers anywhere
on a network.  Unlike lpq, it does not require that the remote
printers be explicitly known to the local system (traditionally
through \fI/etc/printcap\fR), and thus is considerably more flexible
and requires less administration.
.PP
\fBrlpq\fP can be used anywhere a traditional \fBlpq\fP might be used,
and is backwards compatible with traditional BSD \fBlpq\fP.  If
\fBrlpq\fP is invoked as \fBlpq\fP, it preserves all known lpq
semantics.
.PP
\fBrlpq\fP can be set up, installed, and used in the same two ways
as \fBrlpr\fP(1) (that is, either with or without the \fBrlprd\fP(8)
proxy daemon).  Please see \fBrlpr\fP(1) for details, and to
see whether you will need to use the \fBrlprd\fP(8) proxy daemon or
not.
.PP
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
.SS Environment/Setup
.TP
.I \-\-debug
Print gobs of debugging information.
.TP
.I \-N, \-\-no-bind
Don't try to bind to privileged port before connecting to lpd.  Please
see the \fBCONFIGURING A PROXY\fP section in \fBrlpr\fP(1) for
information on use of this option.
.TP
.I \-\-port=number
Select an alternate port (instead of 7290) to connect to, if using
rlprd.  Usually not needed.
.TP
.I \-H, \-\-printhost=host
Select the host to print to (used with \fI-P\fR).

Instead of using \fI-H\fR, one can specify the hostname directly
including it with the printer name with the \fIprinter@hostname\fR
syntax.
.TP
.I \-P, \-\-printer=printername, \-\-queue=printername
Select the printer to print to (used with \fI-H\fR).
.TP
.I \-X, \-\-proxy=proxyhost, \-\-proxyhost=proxyhost
Select the proxy host to use, if necessary.
.TP
.I \-\-timeout=seconds
Set the inactivity timer.  If the connection hangs for more than
\fBseconds\fP seconds, then \fBrlpq\fP will give up.  Use the special
value `-1' to wait forever.  Default timeout is 3 seconds.
.TP
.I \-V, \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.SS Behavior
.TP
.I \-l, \-\-long
Produce a more detailed report.
.TP
.I \-m, \-\-mine
List only the jobs belonging to you.
.TP
.I \-q, \-\-quiet, \-\-silent
Quiet mode \- stay quiet (except for fatal errors).  When this flag is
set, rlpq's return value indicates whether there are any items in
the specified queue that meet the specified criteria (a return value
of zero indicates success).
.PP
.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"
The following environment variables are used by \fBrlpq\fP:
.TP
.B RLPR_PRINTHOST
Specifies the default host's queue to examine.
.TP
\fBPRINTER\fP or \fBLPDEST\fP
Specifies the default printer to check on the host.
.br
First \fBPRINTER\fP is consulted, then \fBLPDEST\fP.

Note that one can also specify the host to examine by setting
printer to be \fIprinter@hostname\fR.  This may be more convenient
than setting \fBRLPR_PRINTHOST\fP, but will confuse the traditional
BSD print commands.
.TP
\fBRLPR_PROXYHOST\fP
Specifies a proxy host to use, if necessary.
.SH FILES
.nf
.ta \w'123456789012345678'u
~/.rlprrc	Personal printer/host database
/etc/hosts.lpd	Host-based security on printhost
/etc/hosts.equiv	Host-based security on printhost
/etc/passwd	Personal identification
/etc/rlprrc	System-wide printer/host database
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBrlpr\fP(1), \fBrlprm\fP(1), \fBrlprd\fP(8), \fBrlprrc\fP(5)
.SH AUTHOR
meem <meem@gnu.org>
.SH "BUGS / LIMITATIONS"
Due to the dynamic nature of print queues, it is possible that the
actual state of the queue may have changed between the time the
snapshot was generated and the output was produced.

