.\" SCCS "@(#)rlprrc.5	1.3	01/01/02 meem"
.TH rlprrc 5 "1999/10/28" "rlpr 2.04" "UNIX Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
rlprrc \- remote printing resource file
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBrlprrc\fP configuration file is consulted by the remote
printing commands (\fBrlpr\fP(1), \fBrlpq\fP(1), and \fBrlprm\fP(1))
to resolve a printqueue or a hostname. It can be used to either lookup
a printqueue (printer) for a given host, or a host for a given
printqueue.  If both the printer and the printhost are known, this
file is never consulted.
.PP
Initially, the remote printing commands look for the file \fI.rlprrc\fR
in the user's home directory.  If that file cannot be found or does
not provide the information necessary to resolve the query, then
the system-wide \fI/etc/rlprrc\fR is consulted (if present).
If resolution is still unsuccessful, the command fails.
.PP
There is one entry per line \- each line has the format:
.PP
\fBhostname: printer1 printer2 ... printerN\fP
.PP
Which indicates that host \fBhostname\fP has printers \fBprinter1
printer2 ... printerN\fP available.  In the case where the remote
printing command knows the host to print to but does not know which
printer to use on that host, the first one (\fBprinter1\fP here) will
be used.
.PP
In the case where the remote printing command knows the printqueue
(printer) to print to but does not know what host has that queue, the
last host which has the specified printqueue is used.  If this
behavior is not acceptable, you can force a certain host to always be
used for a certain printqueue by putting a \fB!\fP after the
printqueue name.
.PP
For example, an \fB.rlprrc\fP file containing:
.ta \w'1234567'u
.nf

	foo.baz.org: litho laserjet4! 
	foo.bar.org: laserjet4 lineprinter

.fi
.PP
will always resolve the printqueue \fBlaserjet4\fP to
\fBfoo.baz.org\fP no matter what other hosts have a printqueue named
\fBlaserjet4\fP.
.PP
The \fBrlprrc\fP file is only consulted in situations where a
printqueue or hostname needs to be resolved.  \fBIt is provided only for
convenience and is not required.\fP
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBrlpr\fP(1), \fBrlpq\fP(1), \fBrlprm\fP(1), \fBrlprd\fP(8)
.SH AUTHOR
meem <meem@gnu.org>
