.\" SCCS "@(#)rlprd.8	1.3	01/01/02 meem"
.TH rlprd 8 "1999/10/28" "rlpr 2.04" "UNIX Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
rlprd \- remote printing proxy daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrlprd\fP  [\fB-nqV\fP] [\fB-p\fPport] [\fB-t\fPtimeout] [\fB--debug\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBrlprd\fP is a proxy which runs between the remote printing commands
(\fBrlpr\fP(1), \fBrlpq\fP(1), and \fBrlprm\fP(1)) and standard
\fBlpd\fP print servers in situations where the remote printing
commands cannot be installed setuid root.  For a discussion on how to
configure the remote printing commands, please see \fBrlpr\fP(1).
.PP
\fBrlprd\fP needs to be installed setuid root \- if it cannot be run this
way, it is \fBuseless\fP.
.PP
\fBrlprd\fP works by mapping non-privileged port requests from
\fBrlpr\fP(1) clients to privileged ports so that \fBlpd\fP's will
listen to them.  Eliminating the "security" gained by having
privileged ports is a non-issue, since the Internet is no longer just
Unix, and Unix is the only OS that has the privileged port concept.
.PP
\fBrlprd\fP is \fBnot\fP a replacement for \fBlpd\fP(8).  It merely
passes data to a \fBlpd\fP(8) on a target machine (which is specified
by an invocation of a remote printing command).  However, when
a client is using the \fBrlpr\fP suite of tools to do remote printing,
the client does not need to run an \fBlpd\fP(8) locally.
.PP
Note that once an \fBrlprd\fP is set up on a network (including the
Internet), any host may connect to it and use its proxy services if it 
knows the name of the machine running it.
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
.TP
.I \-\-debug
Print gobs of debugging information.
.TP
.I \-n, \-\-no-daemon
Don't run rlprd as a daemon.  Usually not needed.
.TP
.I \-p, \-\-port=number
Select an alternate port (instead of 7290) to listen on.  Usually not
needed.
.TP
.I \-q, \-\-quiet, \-\-silent
Quiet mode \- stay quiet (except for fatal errors).
.TP
.I \-t  \-\-timeout=seconds
Set the inactivity timer.  If the connection hangs for more than
\fBseconds\fP seconds, then \fBrlprd\fP will time out the connection.
Use the special value `-1' to wait forever.  Default timeout is 3
seconds.
.TP
.I \-V, \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBrlpr\fP(1), \fBrlpq\fP(1), \fBrlprm\fP(1), \fBrlprrc\fP(5)
.SH AUTHOR
meem <meem@gnu.org>
.SH BUGS/LIMITATIONS
It is not currently possible to run \fBrlprd\fP from \fBinetd\fP(8).

