.\" SCCS "@(#)rlprm.1	1.3	01/01/02 meem"
.TH rlprm 1 "1999/10/28" "rlpr 2.04" "UNIX Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
rlprm \- remove jobs from a remote line printer spooling queue
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrlprm\fP [-qNV] [\fB-H\fPprinthost] [\fB-P\fPprinter] [\fB-X\fPproxyhost]
[\fB--debug\fP] [\fB--timeout=\fPseconds] [\fB--port=\fPport] [-] [ \fBjob # ... \fP] [ \fBusername ... \fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBrlprm\fP uses TCP/IP to remove jobs you own from printers anywhere
on a network.  Unlike lprm, it does not require that the remote
printers be explicitly known to the local system (traditionally
through \fI/etc/printcap\fR), and thus is considerably more flexible
and requires less administration.
.PP
\fBrlprm\fP can be used anywhere a traditional \fBlprm\fP might be used,
and is backwards compatible with traditional BSD \fBlprm\fP.  If
\fBrlprm\fP is invoked as \fBlprm\fP, it preserves all known lprm
semantics, with the exceptions of those semantics mentioned in
\fBBUGS / LIMITATIONS\fP below.
.PP
\fBrlprm\fP can be set up, installed, and used in the same two ways
as \fBrlpr\fP(1) (that is, either with or without the \fBrlprd\fP(8)
proxy daemon).  Please see \fBrlpr\fP(1) for details, and to
see whether you will need to use the \fBrlprd\fP(8) proxy daemon or
not.
.PP
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
.SS Environment/Setup
.TP
.I \-\-debug
Print gobs of debugging information.
.TP
.I \-N, \-\-no-bind
Don't try to bind to privileged port before connecting to lpd.  Please
see the \fBCONFIGURING A PROXY\fP section in \fBrlpr\fP(1) for
information on use of this option.
.TP
.I \-\-port=number
Select an alternate port (instead of 7290) to connect to, if using
rlprd.  Usually not needed.
.TP
.I \-H, \-\-printhost=host
Select the host to print to (used with \fI-P\fR).

Instead of using \fI-H\fR, one can specify the hostname directly
including it with the printer name with the \fIprinter@hostname\fR
syntax.
.TP
.I \-P, \-\-printer=printername, \-\-queue=printername
Select the printer to print to (used with \fI-H\fR).
.TP
.I \-X, \-\-proxy=proxyhost, \-\-proxyhost=proxyhost
Select the proxy host to use, if necessary.
.TP
.I \-\-timeout=seconds
Set the inactivity timer.  If the connection hangs for more than
\fBseconds\fP seconds, then \fBrlprm\fP will give up.  Use the special
value `-1' to wait forever.  Default timeout is 3 seconds.
.TP
.I \-V, \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.SS Behavior
.TP
.I \-
Remove all of your jobs.  Note that this option must be specified
immediately following the end of all other options.  This option is a
mutant supported only for compatibility.  Instead of using this,
include your username as the first argument to \fBrlprm\fP.
.TP
.I \-q, \-\-quiet, \-\-silent
Quiet mode \- stay quiet (except for fatal errors).  See
\fBBUGS / LIMITATIONS\fP for problems using \fBrlprm\fP in silent-mode
operation.
.PP
.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"
The following environment variables are used by \fBrlprm\fP:
.TP
.B RLPR_PRINTHOST
Specifies the default host's queue to remove jobs from.
.TP
\fBPRINTER\fP or \fBLPDEST\fP
Specifies the default printer to remove jobs from on the host.
.br
First \fBPRINTER\fP is consulted, then \fBLPDEST\fP.

Note that one can also specify the host to examine by setting
printer to be \fIprinter@hostname\fR.  This may be more convenient
than setting \fBRLPR_PRINTHOST\fP, but will confuse the traditional
BSD print commands.
.TP
\fBRLPR_PROXYHOST\fP
Specifies a proxy host to use, if necessary.
.SH FILES
.nf
.ta \w'123456789012345678'u
~/.rlprrc	Personal printer/host database
/etc/hosts.lpd	Host-based security on printhost
/etc/hosts.equiv	Host-based security on printhost
/etc/passwd	Personal identification
/etc/rlprrc	System-wide printer/host database
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBrlpr\fP(1), \fBrlpq\fP(1), \fBrlprd\fP(8), \fBrlprrc\fP(5)
.SH AUTHOR
meem <meem@gnu.org>
.SH "BUGS / LIMITATIONS"
Due to limitations in the current lpd protocol, it is not currently
possible to tell whether or not the job removal succeeded when
operating in silent mode.
.PP
Due to limitations in the current lpd protocol, it is not currently
possible to emulate the superuser semantics for the `-' option.
Instead, only root's jobs are removed.
.PP
Due to general niavete in the lpd protocol, \fBrlprm\fP(1) provides a 
lot of room for misbehavior; it is trivial to imagine how it can be
used to remove jobs that do not belong to you.  Unfortunately, any
security added at this point is just sugar-coating -- the underlying
protocol is flawed.
