.\" SCCS "@(#)rlpr.1	1.3	01/01/02 meem"
.TH rlpr 1 "2000/12/30" "rlpr 2.04" "UNIX Reference Manual"
.SH NAME
rlpr \- remote off-line print
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrlpr\fP [\fB-H\fPprinthost] [\fB-P\fPprinter] [\fB-X\fPproxyhost]
[\fB-#\fPcopies] [\fB-C\fPclass] [\fB-J\fPjob] [\fB-T\fPtitle] [\fB-U\fPuser]
[\fB-i\fP[indent]] [\fB-w\fPwidth] [\fB-1234cdfghlmnopqrstvNV\fP]
[\fB--debug\fP]
[\fB--port\fP=port]
[\fB--hostname\fP=hostname]
[\fB--send-data-first\fP]
[\fB--timeout\fP=seconds]
[\fB--tmpdir\fP=dir]
[\fB--verbose\fP]
[\fB--windows\fP]
[file ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBrlpr\fP uses TCP/IP to send print jobs to lpd servers anywhere on
a network.  Unlike \fBlpr\fP, it does not require that the remote printers
be explicitly known to the local system (traditionally through
\fI/etc/printcap\fR), and thus is considerably more flexible and
requires less administration.
.PP
\fBrlpr\fP can be used anywhere a traditional \fBlpr\fP might be used,
and is backwards compatible with traditional BSD \fBlpr\fP.  If
\fBrlpr\fP is invoked as \fBlpr\fP, it preserves all known lpr
semantics.
.PP
\fBrlpr\fP can be installed and used in two different ways:  (the
same guidelines apply for \fBrlpq\fP(1) and \fBrlprm\fP(1))
.PP
1. Ideally, if the \fBrlpr\fP client can be installed setuid root,
then \fBrlpr\fP can interact directly with other \fBlpd\fP's on the
network.  See \fBEXAMPLES\fP below.
.PP
2. If \fBrlpr\fP cannot be installed setuid root (in cases where one
is not the administrator on the machine one needs to print from) then
\fBrlpr\fP can be used in conjunction with an \fBrlprd\fP proxy
agent. See  \fPCONFIGURING A PROXY\fP and \fB EXAMPLES\fP below
for details.
.SH MOTIVATION
Traditional Berkeley \fBlpr\fP has one major drawback: the mortal user
cannot \fBlpr\fP to a printer which is not listed explicitly in the
\fI/etc/printcap\fR file.
.PP		
This is especially annoying in scenarios where there is a central UNIX
server which many users (using their own desktop computers) connect to
in order to do their daily work; If those users wish to print files
from the central server to their personal machines (assuming they had
a local \fBlpd\fP), they \fIcannot do this\fR without the central
server's \fI/etc/printcap\fR being edited to contain the host and
printer of each user on the network \- this scales horribly.
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
.SS Environment/Setup
.TP
.I      \-\-debug
Print gobs of debugging information.
.TP
.I \-N, \-\-no-bind
Don't try to bind to privileged port before connecting to lpd.  Please 
see \fBCONFIGURING A PROXY\fP below for information on use 
of this option.
.TP
.I      \-\-port=number
Select an alternate port (instead of 7290) to connect to, if using
rlprd.  Usually not needed.
.TP
.I \-H, \-\-printhost=host
Select the host to print to (used with \fI-P\fR).

Instead of using \fI-H\fR, one can specify the hostname directly
including it with the printer name with the \fIprinter@hostname\fR
syntax.
.TP
.I \-P, \-\-printer=printername, \-\-queue=printername
Select the printer to print to (used with \fI-H\fR).
.TP
.I \-X, \-\-proxyhost=proxyhost
Select the proxy host to use, if necessary.
.TP
.I \-\-timeout=seconds
Set the inactivity timer.  If the connection hangs for more than
\fBseconds\fP seconds, then \fBrlpr\fP will give up.  Use the special
value `-1' to wait forever.  Default timeout is 3 seconds.
.TP
.I \-\-tmpdir=tmpdir
Use tmpdir for temporary files (by default, \fB/tmp\fP is used)
.TP
.I \-V, \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.PP
.fi
\fBNOTE:\fP instead of specifying the printer, printhost, or proxy
variables on the commandline, one can set up defaults through either
environment variables or \fBrlprrc\fP configuration files.  For
information on personal or system-wide \fBrlprrc\fP files, see
\fBrlprrc\fP(5).
.SS Behavior
.TP
.I \-#, \-\-copies=copies
Print \fIcopies\fR copies of each document \- use sparingly,
\fBprinters aren't copiers\fP.
.TP
.I \-m, \-\-mail
Send mail upon completion.
.TP
.I \-q, \-\-quiet, \-\-silent
Quiet mode \-\ stay quiet (except for fatal errors).
.TP
.I \-r, \-\-remove
Remove file after printing.
.TP
.I \-s
.br
Ignored (provided for compatibility).
.TP
.I \-\-send\-data\-first
Send the "data" transaction before the "control" transaction.  Should
never be required when \fBrlpr\fP is used in conjunction with a RFC
1179 conformant \fBlpd\fP.  However, buggy implementations exist which 
require these semantics.  Use only when necessary.
.TP
.I \-\-verbose
Verbose mode \- on by default unless \fBrlpr\fP is invoked as \fBlpr\fP.
.TP
.I \-\-windows
"Windows" mode \- for printing multiple files to a
windows-based \fBlpd\fP.
.fi
.SS Document Content
.ta \w'1234'u
.nf
\fI\-1\fR	 Print data using \fBtroff\fP(1) R (times roman) font.
\fI\-2\fR	 Print data using \fBtroff\fP(1) I (times italic) font.
\fI\-3\fR	 Print data using \fBtroff\fP(1) B (times bold) font.
\fI\-4\fR	 Print data using \fBtroff\fP(1) S (special) font.
\fI\-c\fR	 Assume data has been produced by \fBcifplot\fP(1).
\fI\-d\fR	 Assume data has been produced by \fBtex\fP(1).
\fI\-f\fR	 Filter data assuming the start of each line has
	a \fIfortran\fR carriage control character.
\fI\-g\fR	 Assume data has been produced by the BSD plot library.
\fI\-l\fR	 Treat control characters as regular characters.
\fI\-n\fR	 Assume data has been produced by \fBditroff\fP.
\fI\-o\fR	 Assume data is \fIpostscript\fR.
\fI\-p\fR	 Print data using \fBpr\fP(1).
\fI\-t\fR	 Assume data has been produced by \fBtroff\fP(1).
\fI\-v\fR	 Assume the data contains a raster image.
.fi
.SS Document Format
.TP
.I \-i, \-\-indent=[cols]
Indent output by \fIcols\fR columns (8 by default).
.TP
.I \-h, \-\-no-burst
Do not print burst (banner) page.
.TP
.I \-w, \-\-width=width
Use \fIwidth\fR for page width when using \fBpr\fP(1).
.TP
.I \-C, \-\-class=class
Use \fIclass\fR for the class name on burst page instead of
the local system name.
.TP
.I \-J,  \-\-job=jobname
Use \fIjobname\fR for the job name on burst page instead of
the first filename in the job.
.TP
.I \-T, \-\-title=title
Use \fItitle\fR for the title when using \fBpr\fP(1)
instead of the current filename.
.TP
.I \-U, \-\-user=username
Use \fIusername\fR for the user name on burst page instead
of the actual username.
.TP
.I \-\-hostname=hostname
Use \fIhostname\fR for the hostname on the burst page instead of
the local system name.
.fi
.SS OS-Specific Extensions
See \fBOS-SPECIFIC EXTENSIONS\fR below for details on these
options.
.TP
.I \-\-ext=os \-\-extension=os
Interpret the arguments passed to \fI\-\-extargs\fR as if on operating 
system \fIos\fR.  Currently, \fIos\fR must be either \fIhpux\fR or
\fInone\fR.
.TP
.I \-\-extargs="args"
Change behavior according to OS-specific arguments listed in
\fIargs\fR.
.br
.SH "CONFIGURING A PROXY"
In situations where the \fBrlpr\fP client cannot be installed setuid
root, \fBrlpr\fP often cannot directly talk to an \fBlpd\fP because
most \fBlpd\fP's require that requests come from privileged
ports. Unfortunately, \fBrlpr\fP cannot "come from a privileged port"
without having superuser status.
.br
\fBThe privileged port requirement is part of RFC 1179.\fP

That said, some \fBlpd\fP's, most notably some of the ones which have
shipped with \fBWindows NT\fP, \fBSolaris\fP, and \fBNCRunix\fP, do
not require requests to come from a privileged port.  Before going
through the work of configuring a proxy, you should make sure one is
required for your situation.  You can check by trying to run
\fBrlpr\fP: if it is successful in spooling the job, you do not need
to install \fBrlpr\fP setuid root.  You should then pass the \fI\-N\fR
(or the more verbose \fI\-\-no-bind\fR) to \fBrlpr\fP in the future to
suppress \fBrlpr\fP's warning messages.

\fBIf your situation does not require a privileged port, do not use
one.\fP You can explicitly request a regular port, even when
\fBrlpr\fP has been installed setuid root, by using the
\fI\-\-no-bind\fR option.  This is a good idea because there are only
11 privileged ports that the RFC allows.  This ends up having the
practical implication of limiting your print requests to about 11 per
every 3 minutes, which is often unacceptable.

The rest of this section assumes that \fBrlpr\fP cannot be installed
setuid root in your situation, and that a remote \fBlpd\fP requires
\fBrlpr\fP connect to it from a privileged port.  It requires that you
or someone you know has root access to another machine the network, so
that you can use a \fBproxy\fP, known as \fBrlprd\fP, to get around
the problem.
.PP
\fBrlprd\fP works by taking \fBlpd\fP requests on a non-privileged port,
mapping them to a privileged port, and sending them out to the real
\fBlpd\fP. The proxy and the lpd \fBneed not be on the same
machine\fP. 
.PP
In the scenario provided in the motivation, if each user had root
access on his own machine, it would be optimal for the user to start
\fBrlprd\fP up on his own machine, in which case the proxy and the
printhost are the same machine.  The user would additionally have to
make sure his own machine was listed in his local
\fI/etc/hosts.lpd\fR so that his \fBlpd\fP would accept connections
from his \fBrlprd\fP.
.PP
However, if the machine the user wants to print to is not running
unix (but is running an \fBlpd\fP) (i.e. Windows, WinNT, etc) -- Then
that user can configure his \fBlpd\fP to accept connections from
an \fBrlprd\fP running somewhere on the network, and use that
\fBrlprd\fP as a proxy for \fBrlpr\fP.
.PP
For more on this mess, see \fBrlprd\fP(8).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
WITHOUT A PROXY  (rlpr is setuid root)
.PP
sun% \fBrlpr --printer=hp4l@foo.bar.org foo.c\fP
.PP
prints \fBfoo.c\fP to the printer \fBhp4l\fP on the host
\fBfoo.bar.org\fP (assuming foo.bar.org has been
configured to accept print requests from host \fBsun\fP in its
\fI/etc/hosts.lpd\fR).
.PP
sun% \fBwho | rlpr --printer=hp4l@foo.bar.org\fP
.PP
prints the output of \fBwho\fP(1) to the printer \fBhp4l\fP on the
host \fBfoo.bar.org\fP.
.TP
WITH A PROXY  (rlpr is a normal program)
.PP
sun% \fBrlpr -Xfoo.bar.org --printer=hp4l@foo.bar.org foo.c\fP
.PP
prints \fBfoo.c\fP to the printer \fBhp4l\fP on the host
\fBfoo.bar.org\fP using \fBfoo.bar.org\fP as a proxyhost. Under this
configuration, foo.bar.org needs to be configured to accept print
requests from the proxy (itself) and \fBnot from sun\fP. In situations
where the proxy and the printhost are not the same machine, this can
lead to some security holes due to the original lameness of berkeley
\fBlpd\fP's host-based security.
.PP
\fBNOTE:\fP if a proxyhost isn't specified anywhere, \fBrlpr\fP
assumes one isn't necessary.
.SH "OS-SPECIFIC EXTENSIONS"
Some vendors have added features to their BSD-based \fBlpr\fP
products, which are upwardly compatible with \fBlpr\fP but
incompatible with one another.  To support these extensions,
\fBrlpr\fP allows the user to indicate what operating system to
emulate and provide a string of OS-specific options, either through 
commandline arguments or environment variables.
.PP
Note that for correct operation, these extensions should be only used
when interoperating with an \fBlpd\fP provided by the vendor for the
indicated operating system.
.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"
The following environment variables are used by \fBrlpr\fP:
.TP
.B RLPR_EXTENSION
Specifies the operating system to interpret OS-specific arguments
relative to.
.TP
.B RLPR_EXTARGS
Specifies the OS-specific arguments.
.TP
.B RLPR_PRINTHOST
Specifies the default host to print to.
.TP
\fBPRINTER\fP or \fBLPDEST\fP
Specifies a default printer (printqueue) to use.
.br
First \fBPRINTER\fP is consulted, then \fBLPDEST\fP.

Note that one can also specify the host to print to by setting
printer to be \fIprinter@hostname\fR.  This may be more convenient
than setting \fBRLPR_PRINTHOST\fP, but will confuse the traditional
BSD print commands.
.TP
\fBRLPR_PROXYHOST\fP
Specifies a proxy host to use, if necessary.
.TP
.B RLPR_CONFDIR
.br
If \fBRLPR_CONFDIR\fP is set, it is the directory containing the
system-wide \fBrlprrc\fP file.  By default, \fB/etc\fP is used.
.TP
.B TMPDIR
.br
If \fBTMPDIR\fP is set, it is used for temporary files.  By default, 
\fB/tmp\fP is used.
.PP
.SH FILES
.nf
.ta \w'123456789012345678'u
~/.rlprrc	Personal printer/host database
$TMPDIR/cf*	Temporary control files on local machine
$TMPDIR/df*	Temporary data file for jobs from stdin
/var/spool/*/cf*	Temporary control files on printhost
/var/spool/*/df*	Temporary data files on printhost
/etc/hosts.lpd	Host-based security on printhost
/etc/passwd	Personal identification
/etc/rlprrc	System-wide printer/host database (by default)
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBrlpq\fP(1), \fBrlprm\fP(1), \fBrlprd\fP(8), \fBrlprrc\fP(5), \fBlpr\fP(1)
.SH AUTHOR
meem <meem@gnu.org>
.SH "BUGS / LIMITATIONS"
Some evil applications have \fBlpr\fP hardcoded into them.
